.\" man page for the pcpustat utility.
.Dd September 5, 2010
.Dt aqua 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aqua
.Nd Advanced Query Using Abook
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl f Ar addressbook
.Op Ar term...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The aqua utility provides a drop-in replacement for abook's mutt-query option.  Whereas abook only searches its name and email fields,
aqua can search all fields.  You can also specify which specific fields to search, combine searches with and/or and parenthesized grouping,
and include regular expressions.  aqua only returns contacts who have at least one email address.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl 1, -first
Only return the first email address for each matching entry.  By default, all addresses are returned, separated by commas.
.It Fl f, -file Ar addressbook
Specify the address book to search.  The default is ~/.abook/addressbook
.Sh SEARCH TERMS
Search terms can be simple strings, which will be treated as case-insensitive with leading and trailing spaces removed.  If a string
begins and ends with parentheses, those will also be removed from the search.  Thus, you can force a search for leading or trailing
blanks by enclosing the string in parentheses.  Quotes are treated as any other character.  The entire string is converted to a
regular expression, so special characters like ^, $, etc. will need to be escaped wth a \\ if you do not want their regular expression behavior.
If you do not include the ^, $, or other regular expression anchors, then the pattern will be sought anywhere within the designated fields.
.Pp
If the term begins with one or more word characters followed by '=', then the left of the '=' is the name of the field to search, while the right of the '=' is the pattern sought.  Otherwise, all fields fill be searched for the entire term.
.Pp
Additionally, if a '&&' or '||' occur between terms, they will be treated as logical 'and' and 'or', respectively.  Parentheses can be used
to group these operations, and are recommended where '&&' and '||' are mixed, since the default grouping is right-associative.
.Pp
If a term begins with '!', then the exclamation point is treated as a logical 'not' operator.  An exclamation point anywhere else in a
term is treated as a literal.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width lockname
.It Cm aqua 'camden'
Finds all contacts containing 'camden' (case-insensitive) in any field
.It Cm aqua 'state=WA && notes=friend'
All of your friends in Washington
.It Cm aqua 'state=(AK|WA|OR|CA)'
West Coast contacts
.It Cm aqua 'notes=^$'
Contacts with no notes
.It Cm aqua 'notes=.'
Contacts with at least one character in the notes field
.It Cm aqua '(name=smith || address=12[0-9]{2}) && city=seattle'
Anyone in Seattle whose name contains smith or whose address contains a number between 1200 and 1299, inclusive.
.It Cm aqua 'state=WA && !name=camden'
Anyone in Washington whose name does not contain 'camden'
.Sh MUTT INTEGRATION
To use aqua as the query engine for
.Xr mutt 1 ,
add the following line to .muttrc:
.Pp
set query_command="aqua %s"
.Pp
mutt automatically quotes the argument so whatever the user enters becomes the first argument to aqua.  mutt also escapes any special
characters that would  be caught be the shell.  Obviously, you can add any of the above options that you may desire.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr abook 1 ,
.Xr mutt 1
.Sh AUTHOR
Sterling (Chip) Camden <sterling@camdensoftware.com>
.Sh WWW
<http://chipstips.com/?tag=rbaqua>
.Sh BUGS
None known.
